JOHN YANG: Good evening. I'm
John Yang. Gwen
Ifill and Judy Woodruff are
away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: Three
attacks in
three countries just days apart
kill more
than 200 people. The growing
threat of ISIS
around the world.
Also ahead on this Fourth of
July: political
correctness on the campaign
trail. Drawing
the line between straight talk
and offensive
speech.
Plus: Should the NFL embrace
medical marijuana?
A growing number of players say
yes.
KYLE TURLEY, Former NFL Player:
Cannabis has
saved my life. I don't think of
suicide anymore.
That's a big thing. You would
think the NFL
would want to address that a
little bit more.
JOHN YANG: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JOHN YANG: A spate of recent
attacks around
the world shows the growing
global reach of
the Islamic State and its
followers. In Iraq
alone this weekend, at least 157
people were
killed in one of Baghdad's
deadliest bombing
since the 2003 invasion.
More than 24 hours after the
attack, makeshift
teams were still pulling bodies
out of charred
buildings. It was one of
Baghdad's bloodiest
days in over a decade. Officials
say they
expect the death toll to climb.
It left residents
visibly shaken.
ZINA MOHAMMED, Iraq (through
translator):
May God punish those who were
responsible
for such a bombing. So many
people are still
under the debris.
ALA KHUDIER, Baghdad (through
translator):
This street is one of the most
beautiful streets
in Baghdad. It's like the Champs
Elysees in
France. We were smelling flowers
from a distance
out of this street. Now we are
smelling dead
bodies.
JOHN YANG: The Islamic State
quickly claimed
responsibility for the suicide
truck bombing
in the largely Shiite
neighborhood. Many of
the victims were young,
gathering to break
the day's fast, part of the
Islamic holy month
of Ramadan.
Sunday's bombings capped a week
of ISIS-linked
attacks spanning the globe. Last
Tuesday,
three suicide bombers stormed
Turkey's Ataturk
Airport in Istanbul, killing at
least 45 people.
Turkish officials blamed ISIS,
although there
was no direct claim of
responsibility. Most
were foreigners. One was
American.
MAN (through translator): Two
people opened
fire in the air. Then I shouted
and ran to
a safe area. They closed the
gate chanting
Allahu akbar opened fire.
JOHN YANG: ISIS claimed
responsibility for
that attack as well. All this
comes as ISIS
has lost significant territory
in places that
were once its strongholds, Iraq
and Syria.
Last week, Iraqi forces fully
liberated the
city of Fallujah, which the
group had controlled
since 2014. Iraqi officials
attribute the
uptick in suicide bombings to
ISIS losses
on the battlefield.
We will have more on the threat
of the Islamic
State right after the news
summary.
In Saudi Arabia, suicide
bombings rocked three
different cities. There was no
immediate claim
of responsibility. The attacks
struck just
before the end of Ramadan. They
detonated
near the Prophet Mohammed's
Mosque in Medina,
one of Islam's holiest sites, as
well as a
Shiite mosque in Qatif, and just
outside the
U.S. Consulate in Jeddah. In
addition to the
bombers, four security officers
were killed
in Medina.
The leader of the United
Kingdom's right-wing
anti-European Union party said
today he's
resigning. Nigel Farage, the
head of the U.K.
Independence Party, is the
latest politician
to step aside, after the country
voted to
leave the E.U. Today in London,
the 52-year-old
said he never wanted to be a
career politician,
and pledged support for the
party's next leader.
NIGEL FARAGE, U.K. Independence
Party Leader:
My aim for being in politics was
to get Britain
out of the European Union. That
is what we
voted for in that referendum the
two weeks
ago. And that is why I now feel
that I have
done my bit, that I couldn't
possibly achieve
more than we managed to get in
that referendum,
and so I feel it's right that I
should now
stand aside.
JOHN YANG: Farage now joins
conservative party
Prime Minister David Cameron who
plans to
step down by fall, and let a
successor deal
with the process of Britain's
exit from the
E.U.
More than 180 people have died
in flooding
across central and southern
China. Torrential
rains from summer monsoons
triggered a landslide,
washed away railroad lines, and
shut down
roads. The downpour is expected
to continue
until Wednesday; 33 million
residents have
been affected by the deluge.
And back in this country, it was
a Fourth
of July marked by festive
parades, fireworks,
and increased security. Under
gloomy skies
in the nation's capital, police
were on guard
as visitors made their way
through checkpoints
near the National Mall. And in
Philadelphia,
people watched a star-studded
reading of the
Declaration of Independence
before that city's
parade got under way.
And some big news out of the
National Basketball
Association today. Superstar
Kevin Durant
announced he's joining the
Golden State Warriors.
The move will bring even more
talent to a
team that won a record 73 games
last season.
The former MVP and seven-time
all-star has
reportedly agreed to a two-year,
$54.3 million
contract.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
how ISIS
is inspiring attacks around the
world; more
campaign controversies for both
Hillary Clinton
and Donald Trump; could medical
marijuana
help NFL players ease their
pain?; and much
more.
We take a closer look at the
increase in attacks
by ISIS around the globe with
two reporters
who have covered the insurgency
very closely.
Joby Warrick covers national
security for
The Washington Post. His book
"Black Flags:
The Rise of ISIS" won this
year's Pulitzer
Prize for Nonfiction. It's his
second Pulitzer.
And Rukmini Callimachi is a
correspondent
with The New York Times and
joins us from
Paris.
Welcome to you both.
Rukmini, I would like to start
with you.
This spasm of violence that we
have seen over
the last two weeks, three
attacks, three countries,
what do you make of this? Are
they sending
a message? Is this a coincidence
Were they
planning it this way?
RUKMINI CALLIMACHI, The New York
Times: ISIS,
like all jihadi groups,
considers Ramadan
to be a sacred time for doing
jihad.
And before the start of the holy
month of
Ramadan, which began roughly
three weeks ago,
the spokesman of the group
issued once again
a call for an increase in
violence. And so
the way I read it that these
attacks and the
heightening of them in this
period is a response
to that call.
JOHN YANG: And, Joby, how do
they do this?
How do they get these attacks
going? Some
of them, are they directed by
ISIS? Are they
just inspired by ISIS?
JOBY WARRICK, The Washington
Post: Yes, it's
a mixed bag.
And as Rukmini said, they have
been issuing
the call to do something during
Ramadan. And
the call specifically says
whatever is available
to you. Don't wait for orders,
don't wait
for instructions. If you have an
opportunity
to do something nasty, do it.
And so you have see a lot of
lone wolf attacks.
You have seen some gangs getting
together
and doing some of these attacks.
It's not
necessarily coordinated, but
it's very effective.
JOHN YANG: And, Rukmini, were
these attacks
in any way -- you said that they
sent the
word out that they wanted this
to happen.
But is it just that the
opportunities came
up in this cluster?
RUKMINI CALLIMACHI: If you are
an adherent
to this group, you know the
rhythm and you
know that Ramadan is a period
when these attacks
almost like a prayer are
supposed to be viewed
more holy than at other times of
the year.
And so I think it's reasonable
to expect that
the attacks we have seen have
been in the
planning stages for some time
and that they
use Ramadan as a time to hit.
And adding to
what Joby said, we have seen in
this period
of Ramadan both inspired
attacks. So, we had
Omar Mateen in Orlando Florida,
and we had
a guy called Larossi Abballa
here in France
who stabbed to death a policeman
in the name
of ISIS.
We saw attacks that they
directed them themselves
and carried out themselves, like
Baghdad yesterday.
And then we have seen attacks
like Bangladesh,
which are being carried out
basically by their
territories abroad.
Bangladesh has been one of their
territories
that they have spent a lot of
time hyping
in their publication. And the
attack in the
cafe that happened a few days
ago was the
19th attack in Bangladesh
claimed by ISIS
in less than nine months.
JOHN YANG: Is there a danger,
Joby, that there
is going to be a backlash? The
Turkey attack,
Turkey has never really taken a
lot of action
against ISIS. Is this going to
trigger a big
response from Turkey?
JOBY WARRICK: The Turks
certainly indicating
that it will.
They have been trying to track
down on recruits,
for example, and weapons going
across the
border. But now it's obviously a
full-scale
war. So you have to be seeing
what they will
do that is different from what
they are doing
now, perhaps some more shares
resources, allowing
others to use their soil for
attacks against
the caliphate.
But I think that the Turks are
really in the
game now. So, in that sense,
there is blowback.
There will be a price exacted
with ISIS for
doing these kinds of attacks.
And you will
see it in other places too such
as Bangladesh.
The whole world really is
rallying in a way
that is unprecedented against
this organization.
JOHN YANG: And, Rukmini, a lot
has been made
about the fact that the attacks
in Turkey
and in Bangladesh were carried
out by groups,
rather than individuals, that it
was sort
of coordination amongst these
people. Is this
something new? Is this sort of a
new development,
taking this to a next stage?
RUKMINI CALLIMACHI: Not really.
You have to look back to the
November 13 attack
in Paris, which was carried out
by 10 ISIS
attackers, nine of whom traveled
from Syria
to carry out those killings. The
Brussels
attacks were a mixed bag. It
included people
that had traveled from Syria and
then other
locals that they joined up with
there.
Turkey, we're still in that fog
where we don't
exactly know how these people
entered Turkey.
Did they come from Syria? Did
they come from
somewhere else? But the
indication has been
that they were most likely sent
by ISIS central.
And then Bangladesh, you have a
growing network
that I think has gone unnoticed
because until
a couple of days ago they hadn't
had a catastrophic
attack like we have seen now.
But if you are
watching their publication and
their propaganda,
Bangladesh was very much a place
that was
in their crosshairs. They have
been very much
amping up their rhetoric there.
JOHN YANG: And, Joby, this also
comes as they
have been losing territory. They
have been
losing ground in Iraq, in Syria.
They just
lost Fallujah this past week.
Is this in any sense ISIS saying
we don't
-- it doesn't matter? They're
going to project
their source outside that
territory in a way?
JOBY WARRICK: It is interesting
that the weaker
they get in their caliphate, in
their home
territory, the more they do seem
to lash out.
And whether this is really them
just trying
to still be relevant, or if it's
something
that suggests that they're
really moving to
a new phase, that is something
we -- still
has to be seen, because even
though they are
losing territory, they are
losing personnel
in the caliphate, they are
growing their organization
other places.
You see these other inspired
groups. We see
cells. We see real reorganized
ISIS organizations
in other places. And some of
those are getting
big instead of smaller, so this
campaign is
not over by any stretch.
JOHN YANG: Joby Warrick, Rukmini
Callimachi,
that's a very sobering note to
end on. Thanks
for being with us.
JOBY WARRICK: Thank you.
JOHN YANG: And now to Politics
Monday, Independence
Day edition.
For that, I'm joined now by Stu
Rothenberg
of the Rothenberg & Gonzales
Political Report
and a columnist for The
Washington Post, and
Tamara Keith, NPR White House
correspondent.
Stu, Tam, welcome.
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Thank
you.
JOHN YANG: It's a holiday, but
it's not a
holiday from Donald Trump's
tweets and Donald
Trump tweet controversy.
He sent one out over the
weekend. He referred
to Hillary Clinton as the most
corrupt candidate
ever, no surprise. But it looked
like -- the
words were on a six-pointed star
over a sea
of cash. People quickly picked
up it out on
social media, said it was a Star
of David.
Hillary Clinton released a
statement today.
She called it blatantly
anti-Semitic. Trump
took it back, killed the tweet,
and also said
that the dishonest media was
depicting the
star in the tweet as a Star of
David, rather
than a sheriff's star or plain
star.
Stu.
STUART ROTHENBERG, Editor and
Publisher, The
Rothenberg & Gonzales Political
Report: Well,
we always -- I carry sheriff's
stars around
with me all the time and use
them in my tweets
too.
JOHN YANG: To make points.
STUART ROTHENBERG: No.
Look, John, it's another day of
Donald Trump,
it's another controversy, it's
another instance.
And if we hadn't done this six,
eight, ten,
20 times before, maybe you could
say, oh,
this was a mistake or this was
misinterpreted.
But there's a whole series of
these and this
is who the man is. And this is
what the campaign
is. The campaign isn't field
organization
or TV ads. It's tweets, and
controversial
tweets.
JOHN YANG: Do you think he knows
what the
connotation is to these things,
or does he
not notice them or...
STUART ROTHENBERG: Oh, I would
certainly hope
-- he is an adult. He ought to
know. He is
a 70-year-old man who claims to
be knowledgeable,
and know some history, and of
course he should
know. I don't understand and the
campaign
doesn't explain, does it? They
don't tell
you how this happens.
TAMARA KEITH: So, there's
reporting out there
from this news organization Mic
that this
image wasn't generated by the
Trump campaign.
It came from a dark place in the
Internet
where you find white supremacist
things like
this. And his campaign, we have
asked. My
colleagues at NPR, we have been
in touch with
his campaign repeatedly all
weekend long,
saying, where did this image
come from, how
did this happen, why did you
then take it
down, what do you have to say
for this?
And there has been no response.
If it weren't
a pattern, if it hadn't happened
many times
before -- and Trump has been
slow to either
disavow, say, oh, gosh, fire
that intern or
-- and this tweet that he sent
out was really
justifying it, rather than
disavowing it.
JOHN YANG: And, Tamara, the
candidate you
have been following most
closely, Secretary
Hillary Clinton, had her own
sort of damage
control this past week, meeting
-- the tarmac
meeting Attorney General Loretta
Lynch and
her husband, the former
President Bill Clinton.
This all sort of blew up also.
How did she
handle it, and do you think she
handled it
well?
TAMARA KEITH: I just want to
just talk about
one other thing, which is she
had an interview
with the FBI. That should have
been the news
all weekend long.
And because Donald Trump tweeted
that thing
out, some of the information was
taken away
from what was a very bad day for
Hillary Clinton.
You have the party's presumptive
nominee sitting
down for a three-and-a-half-hour
interview
with the FBI about an issue, her
e-mail server,
that has been dogging her the
entire campaign.
This comes on the heels of the
tarmac situation,
which both President Clinton and
Attorney
General Loretta Lynch say they
wouldn't do
again. That casts a question
over the entire
investigation.
Donald Trump is very easily to
be able say,
well, it's rigged. They had a
chat on an airplane.
And there is not going to be a
good answer
to that reasonable doubt that
he's raising.
JOHN YANG: Stu, in these
investigations, they
end, usually...
STUART ROTHENBERG: They never
end.
JOHN YANG: They never will.
If they end with an indictment,
we know about
it. If they end without an
indictment, the
FBI policy is not to say
anything.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Yes. Well,
certainly, this
was a very bad few days for the
former secretary
of state, lot of negative
coverage, lot of
negative news, lots of questions
about the
tarmac.
It was terribly embarrassing. I
think it was
a big news day, a big news
event, but I think
in the long term in terms of the
election
itself, the campaign and then
the election,
it's less of a dramatic event,
for this reason.
We're either going to get an
indictment or
we're not going to get an
indictment.
And if we get to the Democratic
Convention
and there's no indictment, I
don't know. Maybe
we will hear that the
investigation has concluded
and that there are some report
or comments.
But in any case, we're going to
go to a different
phase of the campaign.
And so this is bad for her
today. I agree
completely. The idea of Donald
Trump stepping
on Hillary Clinton's terrible
news is ridiculous
from a political point of view.
But so she
had a bad few days, and I think
this will
pass. Big news event, not the
impact on the
campaign.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes. And law
enforcement forces
tell NPR's Carrie Johnson that
they do not
anticipate an indictment in this
case.
The fact that Clinton has sat
down for this
interview means that --
typically, that means
that it's nearing an end, when
the principal
sits down for an interview.
JOHN YANG: And, Tamara, we are
going to go
to a new phase of the campaign
tomorrow, President
Obama appearing for the first
time with the
candidate who wants to replace
him.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes. And he wants
her to replace
him.
They will campaigning together
in South Carolina
-- or -- sorry -- North
Carolina, which is
an important swing state, one
that President
Obama won narrowly in 2008, lost
narrowly
in 2012. The Clinton campaign
sees it as a
target state. They have been
running ads there.
Then Donald Trump has scheduled
an event in
the evening also in North
Carolina.
JOHN YANG: A little
counterprogramming. Stu,
he's not on the ballot, but, in
less than
a minute, does the president
have coattails
that could help Hillary?
STUART ROTHENBERG: I think he
could help in
terms of enthusiasm, generating
turnout among
African-Americans and possibly
among younger
voters.
Sure. Job numbers are good. Poll
numbers are
up. Right now, he's an asset. We
will see
if that continues, but
certainly. And North
Carolina is absolutely an
important state.
It is bigger than Wisconsin in
terms of electoral
votes. We talk about Wisconsin
and Pennsylvania.
North Carolina is a big deal.
JOHN YANG: Stu Rothenberg,
Tamara Keith, happy
Fourth of July.
STUART ROTHENBERG: You too.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
JOHN YANG: Thanks.
Sticking with politics, we take
a look at
the intersection of inflammatory
rhetoric
and free speech.
Hari Sreenivasan has a
historical perspective.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Candidates'
speeches on
the campaign trail can at times
get inflammatory
with little regard for accuracy.
That's not
new. But this election season
has been marked
by divisive language that some
find hateful.
So, what is the line to be
looking for? And
what lessons of the past can
help guide us?
Joining me now to dissect the
rhetoric on
the campaign trail is
presidential historian
Michael Beschloss, and Beverly
Gage, professor
of American history at Yale.
Thank you both for joining us.
So, I want to ask. I guess the
first question
is, is, when free speech
intersects with fear-mongering,
Michael Beschloss, how much is
too much? How
do we figure out where that line
is?
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS, Presidential
Historian:
Well, I think the one certain
line is when
you have a presidential
candidate, especially
of a major party, criticizing
groups within
American society.
That has happened in history.
You had, for
instance, the candidate of the
Know-Nothings,
1856, Millard Fillmore, a former
president,
who said if you allow people of
Irish origin
and others to run rampant in
American society
-- he was also anti-Catholic --
this will
be a danger to America.
But I think most nominees of
major parties
through at least our modern
history realize
that this is a country that
depends on all
sorts of people living together
under one
umbrella, and they also realize
that if you
want to win, usually, that
happens by not
alienating groups, but by trying
to bring
them together.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Beverly Gage,
is it easy
to find that line?
BEVERLY GAGE, Assistant
Professor of American
History, Yale University: I
think it's not
always so easy to find it, but
it's the sort
of thing where people tend to
know it when
they see it.
And one basic measure is whether
or not someone
is telling the factual truth. We
would like
to think that that is sort of a
baseline.
People don't, of course, always
adhere to
that.
But I agree with Michael that
one of the other
lines that we are really talking
about is
vilifying whole swathes of
people, creating
a kind of conspiratorial
language, a discourse
that is about guilt by
association. Those
can be very, very dangerous
things, but they
have been around a long time.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Here is a
sample clip from
some of the things that at least
presidential
candidate Donald Trump has said
that has a
lot of folks concerned.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I have had horrible rulings. I
have been treated
very unfairly by this judge.
Now, this judge is of Mexican
heritage. I'm
building a wall.
A total and complete shutdown of
Muslims entering
the United States, until our
country's representative
can figure out what the hell is
going on.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Michael, you
gave some good
examples of how this kind of
speech has happened
in the past. Is there something
different
about this campaign? Is it just
the times
that we live in? Is it the
technology that
transfers this speech so
quickly? What is
changing things?
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: Sure. You
have got Twitter,
you have got the Internet. It's
a lot easier
to make charges like this and
have people
hear them very quickly.
But the other thing is that,
earlier in history,
you have had instances like this
-- Strom
Thurmond in 1948 would talk
about law and
order, and what he was really
referring to
was what he thought was the
danger, his word,
to American society of
integration of the
races.
George Wallace slightly more
muted than that
in 1968. They were never able to
get nominated
by a major party. That's what
makes Donald
Trump's situation so interesting
and novel.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Beverly Gage,
one of the
things that came up, at least
historical,
when we started doing searches
for this, the
daisy ad that was back in the
LBJ campaign,
it was one of the most striking
one-minute-long
ads that we have ever seen.
It's a little girl. She's
picking petals.
Everything seems to be going
fine. There's
no music, nothing. Then, all of
a sudden,
we sort of zoom, I guess when
the camera zoom
idea was new, zoom into her
eyeball and see
this atomic explosion, with the
narrator coming
up.
BEVERLY GAGE: That was a Lyndon
Johnson ad
targeting Barry Goldwater. It
was not broadcast
very much, but it became one of
the most dramatic
and famous political ads in its
moment because
it basically suggested that, if
you vote for
Barry Goldwater, you were going
to get a nuclear
holocaust around the world, a
pretty big leap.
At the same time, I think the
1964 election
is interesting for the politics
that surrounded
Goldwater. The establishment
wing of the party
didn't like Goldwater at all.
They thought
he was an extremist, that he was
using violent
rhetoric, that he was taking the
support of
groups like the John Birch
Society, which
had a very kind of
conspiratorial, anti-communist
approach, and so it really
divided the party.
And one of the things that was
interesting
then and that I think we are
going to see
playing out now is, just how
much control
does a party have over its own
nominee?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Michael
Beschloss, does
selling fear work?
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: It sometimes
does.
Wendell Willkie in 1940, he
certainly was
-- never said anything remotely
like what
we are talking about in terms of
defaming
minority groups, but he did in
the full campaign
say essentially, if you elect
Franklin Roosevelt,
even though he is promising you
that he will
not involve the United States in
a foreign
war, you can be sure that, if
he's elected,
we are going to be at war
probably within
a few months.
He didn't believe that was true.
It went way
beyond the facts, but it caused
Willkie to
soar ahead in the polls to the
point that,
by November, he was almost
within striking
distance of winning the
presidency.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Beverly Gage,
as you pointed
out, this is not one party or
another. This
is kind of as old as politics.
And just in the last cycle, a
lot of people
took Hillary Clinton to task for
the 3:00
a.m. ad that she had against
Barack Obama.
It was just pictures of kids
sleeping in their
beds, and it was, it's 3:00
a.m., the red
phone, so to speak, in the White
House is
ringing. Do you know who is
going to answer
that phone? Are you sure who
you're going
to vote for now is going to make
that decision?
I guess in politics and almost
in sales, it
is almost a natural thing. I
have to convince
you that there is a problem and,
B, that I
am the solution. Right?
How do we figure out when we
cross over that?
And it's also pretty natural in
politics to
want to tear the other candidate
down, but
without necessarily going into
this other
space that we seem to be in
today?
BEVERLY GAGE: Right.
And fear is a good motivator
often. And, sometimes,
it's a very accurate thing. It
is something
that you want to mobilize in
people. Sometimes,
there are really concrete things
to be afraid
of.
I think the difference is when
it crosses
the line into conspiracy
thinking and into
this sort of, well, we have this
one fact
and therefore we are going to
infer a whole
set of other terrible things
that might happen
from that one fact.
It is a very hard line to draw.
And I think
the other thing that is
interesting to think
about, is the way that this kind
of fear-based
politics, which often comes up
in campaigns,
even if the candidate who is
using that kind
of fear-based politics loses, it
can have
pretty dramatic long-term
consequences.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Beverly Gage,
Michael Beschloss,
thanks so much for your
perspective, as always.
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: Thank you,
Hari.
BEVERLY GAGE: Thanks, Hari.
JOHN YANG: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": how
a slave helped
Jack Daniel make his whiskey; a
story of life,
death and redemption, the last
in our series
of summer reads; and reflecting
on true American
heroes on this Independence Day.
But, first, a pair of NFL
players are challenging
the league to reconsider its
policy on pot
when it comes to medical use and
particularly
to treat pain.
Katie Couric of Yahoo News sat
down with the
players. Here's an extended
excerpt of her
story.
EUGENE MONROE, NFL Player:
Cannabis is a substance
that has been stigmatized for
years, and that's
why I'm so adamant about
educating people
on the health benefits of it.
MD-BO /KATIE COURIC: Eugene
Monroe made
headlines when he became the
first active
player in the NFL to publicly
call for the
league to change its policy on
pot, which
is on the banned substance list.
EUGENE MONROE: I would like to
know why the
NFL is maintaining such a stern
position of
the medical value of cannabis
when, countrywide,
doctors are prescribing it to
their patients.
MD-BO /KATIE COURIC: Monroe, who
was recently
cut from the Baltimore Ravens,
believes using
marijuana for pain relief can be
a much safer
alternative to prescription
drugs like oxycodone.
EUGENE MONROE: What I noticed
was that former
players would openly speak about
their experience
of being addicted to opioids
that they were
prescribed by their team
doctors.
JIM MCMAHON, Former NFL Player:
I was eating
100 Percocets a month during my
career, even
up until five years after I
retired. And it
just made me feel bad. It made
my head fuzzy.
It screws up your insides.
KYLE TURLEY, Former NFL Player:
The rage episodes,
all of these things, vertigo,
were mounting
so much greater under the pill
prescription.
MD-BO /KATIE COURIC: But when
former NFL
lineman Kyle Turley turned to
marijuana for
relief, he says everything
changed.
KYLE TURLEY: I wouldn't be here
today if it
wasn't for cannabis, period.
Cannabis has
saved my life. I don't think of
suicide anymore.
That's a big thing. You would
think the NFL
would want to address that a
little bit more.
MD-BO /KATIE COURIC: The NFL
told us its
policy that covers marijuana is
collectively
bargained and is a joint NFL/NFL
Players Association
program, adding: "We are guided
by medical
advisers. They have not
indicated a need to
change."
ROGER GOODELL, National Football
League Commissioner:
We believe it's the correct
policy for now
in the best interest of our
players and the
long-term health of our players.
I don't foresee
a change in that clearly in the
short term.
MD-BO /KATIE COURIC: What do you
want from
the NFL?
EUGENE MONROE: I want the NFL to
take a serious
look at the medical value of
cannabis, which
they currently deny. I want them
to stop testing
players, and stop punishing
players for consuming
cannabis.
MD-BO /KATIE COURIC: Dr. Staci
Gruber studies
marijuana's effect on the brain.
DR. STACI GRUBER, McLean
Hospital: Professional
athletes who are in pain much of
the time,
the question is, how can we best
treat them?
Twenty-five states plus D.C. now
have full
medical marijuana laws. Another
18 have partial
medical marijuana laws. The
question is, what
does it do? Is it all good? All
bad? Or somewhere
in between?
MD-BO /KATIE COURIC: Derrick,
this is the
first time you're speaking out
about this.
DERRICK MORGAN, NFL Player: I
think that for
the NFL to say that cannabis
doesn't benefit
the long-term health of its
players without
actually having gone and done
the research,
I don't think that's accurate,
that's an accurate
statement.
MD-BO /KATIE COURIC: Derrick
Morgan, a linebacker
with the Tennessee Titans, has
joined forces
with Eugene Monroe. Both believe
marijuana
may not only be a safer
alternative for pain
relief, but could also be
effective for dealing
with the symptoms of CTE.
DERRICK MORGAN: You hear all the
research
and the news about the CTE, the
traumatic
brain injury, and, as a player,
you take notice
of that.
MD-BO /KATIE COURIC: CTE, the
neurodegenerative
disorder that has been
discovered in the brains
of many deceased NFL players,
was the focus
of the movie "Concussion." While
the league
acknowledges the findings, it
believes additional
research is needed to determine
potential
causes of the disease.
Monroe believes a compound found
in marijuana
may even help prevent CTE.
EUGENE MONROE: The U.S.
government has a patent
on cannabinoids that say they
protect the
brain in the event of a
traumatic injury,
which is concussions. And I have
been an unfortunate
recipient of numerous
concussions throughout
my career, and quite fearful of
the potential
impact later in my life.
DR. STACI GRUBER: I think
there's been some
extraordinary compelling
pre-clinical work
that's demonstrated CBD,
cannabidiol, is incredibly
effective at helping to limit
the extent of
brain injury, which is really
very intriguing
and promising.
DERRICK MORGAN: I feel like the
NFL has a
responsibility to look into it,
to delegate
time and money to research this
for its players.
Given how much influence that
the NFL has
on society, I think that it
would help the
greater good. There's a lot of
people suffering
and there's a lot of people that
can benefit
from cannabis as a medical
treatment.
MD-BO /KATIE COURIC: At the
Realm of Caring
Foundation in Colorado, Heather
Jackson and
her team are passionate
advocates for medical
marijuana.
HEATHER JACKSON, Realm of Caring
Foundation:
Families need information, they
need dosing
help, they need to know what the
science is,
what the research would suggest,
and that's
where we fill in the gap.
MD-BO /KATIE COURIC: Jackson
helped start
the nonprofit after turning to
cannabis to
save her son.
HEATHER JACKSON: My son Zaki has
a rare catastrophic
form of early childhood epilepsy
called Doose
syndrome. His seizures started
when he was
four months old, and by the time
he was 5,
he had over 500,000 seizures. I
gave him his
first dose on July 19, 2012, and
he went 48
hours with no seizures.
MD-BO /KATIE COURIC: She says
her son is
now seizure-free after
incorporating a cannabis
cocktail known as Charlotte's
Web, which contains
a high concentration of CBD.
EUGENE MONROE: That's why I'm a
proponent
of researching this to find out
exactly which
pathways this is affecting
people, and this
is giving people their lives
back.
MD-BO /KATIE COURIC: Monroe has
donated
$80,000 through Realm of Caring
to fund two
research studies that will
explore the impact
of cannabinoid therapies on the
long-term
health of NFL players.
MARCEL BONN-MILLER, University
of Pennsylvania:
Cannabis is not cannabis is not
cannabis.
It's made up of 130 different
chemical compounds,
some of which may have benefits
for these
folks and some of which may not.
So it's really
important to try to understand
specifically
what could help.
MD-BO /KATIE COURIC: The NFL is
not involved
in the studies, but
representatives from the
league did hold a conference
call with the
lead researchers, indicating
they are interested
in learning more.
JOHN YANG: Later this week, we
will have a
report from Miles O'Brien about
research into
medical marijuana, and why
patients are pushing
for its use. That's our Leading
Edge science
story on Wednesday.
Grilling outdoors and drinking
cold refreshments
aren't mentioned anywhere in the
Declaration
of Independence, but they're
both a big part
of how we celebrate the Fourth
of July.
This next segment was inspired
by some recent
revelations about the
bestselling brand of
American whiskey. Last week, The
New York
Times reported that Jack
Daniel's founder
actually learned a lot about
making whiskey
from a slave who worked for the
same distiller.
While that's been known before,
it hasn't
been widely advertised. Now the
company is
starting to acknowledge their
complicated
history on its distillery tours
in Tennessee.
That has some people asking
questions about
the heritage of American whiskey
and about
other culinary matters in the
South.
Michael Twitty is a culinary
historian. I
sat down with him to get his
perspective.
Michael Twitty, welcome.
MICHAEL TWITTY, Culinary
Historian: Hi.
JOHN YANG: How common was this?
Jack Daniel's
knew for a long time about the
role of this
slave named Nearis Green in the
development
of the company, but they just
never talked
about it. How common was that in
the development
of food and drink across the
South?
MICHAEL TWITTY: Enslaved people
were involved
in every single aspect of
Southern life.
Even when someone didn't --
quote -- "own
enslaved people" or own slaves
-- we prefer
to say enslaved people or
enslaved person
-- enslaved folks were doing the
work.
And it's very interesting,
because you read
these journals and writings of
Southern planters,
and it's as if their hands are
in the dirt,
it's as if their fingers are on
the bricks,
it's as if their hands are in
the kitchen
and their hands are on the
shovels. But they
are not.
And so enslaved people are often
hired out
to work for other people.
Distillers were
experts. They were skilled
workers. So, that
is another form of income.
So, if you are only making so
much of a cash
crop, a lot of your money is
going to come
from in the hills and the
piedmont from making
alcohol, which is substantial.
So, that enslaved
person would have been very
valuable and very
necessary to an operation of
that sort.
JOHN YANG: But they weren't just
providing
the labor.
MICHAEL TWITTY: No.
JOHN YANG: They were helping
develop and create
the craft of what they were
doing.
MICHAEL TWITTY: Oftentimes, they
were the
brains.
And, unfortunately, because
enslaved people
were considered three-fifths of
a person,
they aren't being given credit
for their intellectual
capital. So, when an enslaved
person invents
something or innovate something,
they improve
something, that credit is being
given to the
slave holder, not to the
enslaved.
And that this does over time is,
it sets up
for a really bad paradigm, where
we think,
these poor people, they were
just the machines,
they were just set to do a task.
And the reality
is, no, these were innovative,
entrepreneurial,
intelligent people.
You don't set -- you don't bring
a bunch of
idiots to your country to build
it. You bring
geniuses. And a lot of times,
that is what
was going on. They were expert
horticulturists.
They were expert blacksmiths.
They were expert
distillers.
But the unfortunate part is, we
know there
were more people like Mr. Green,
but will
we ever know their names or
their stories
or what they could have been had
they been
free men and women?
JOHN YANG: And the influence is
more than
just liquor and distilling and
fermenting
alcohol.
MICHAEL TWITTY: Yes.
JOHN YANG: It is was through
what we now think
of as Southern cooking, right?
MICHAEL TWITTY: Oh, absolutely.
And I was just part of an
ongoing debate,
which will never end, over the
ownership of
Southern cooking. And the best
way to put
it is, is that this is a
co-created world.
It's a co-created world between
Africans,
Europeans and Native Americans
and others
who are making up Southern-ness
and American-ness
as they go.
But I would like to always quote
art historian
Robert Farris Thompson, who
says, until you
know how African you are, you
don't know how
American you are.
So, all of these pieces are
woven in together.
And you can't possibly talk
about the Southern
kitchen without talking about
peanuts or sesame
or okra or watermelon or deep
frying or barbecue
or other forms of cooking
techniques and spicing
and ways of looking at food that
are uniquely
part of the African diaspora.
JOHN YANG: What do you think of
Jack Daniel's
distillery now acknowledging the
role that
this man played in the
development of the
company and of the product?
MICHAEL TWITTY: Well, I think
it's pretty
critical.
I think that we are at a point
where the pushback
-- and I have led some of that
pushback -- talking
about cultural appropriation,
talking about
giving credit where credit is
due -- sometimes,
I recoil, because I feel, oh, I
don't know
if I'm doing the right thing.
But when I hear news like this,
I know I am.
And other people who are like me
are rewriting
the history of American food and
drink, not
just because we want to talk
about the past,
but we have brilliant black
mixologists, brilliant
black bartenders in the now
whose legacy we
can not only celebrate, but
preserve, so people
know that Mr. Green didn't die
in vain.
JOHN YANG: Michael Twitty,
thanks for being
with us/
MICHAEL TWITTY: Thank you very
much.
JOHN YANG: There are 2.2 million
prisoners
in the United States. Almost
half of them
JOHN YANG: There are 2.2 million
prisoners
in the United States. Almost
half of them
are black.
In this final addition to our
summer reading
list, we hear from one former
inmate who is
trying to stem the tide.
At the recent Los Angeles Book
Festival, Jeffrey
Brown talked with Shaka Senghor,
the author
of "Writing My Wrongs: Life,
Death, and Redemption
in an American Prison."
JEFFREY BROWN: Let me ask you
first, why did
you write this book?
SHAKA SENGHOR, Author, "Writing
My Wrongs:
Life, Death, and Redemption in
an American
Prison": I thought it was really
important
to help people understand what's
happening
in the inner city where young
men and women
were ending up in a prison
system.
But also I wanted to bring
people as close
to the prison experience as
possible without
them have to actually get
arrested, because
I think in order to solve a
problem, you have
to be in close proximity to it.
And I just think the book brings
you right
there front and center. Our
system is a mystery
to most taxpayers. And it
shouldn't be. I
think that we should know as
much about the
prison system as possible,
considering that
the society has been so deeply
impacted by
what's happening within the
system.
JEFFREY BROWN: Tell me a little
bit about
your childhood.
SHAKA SENGHOR: I grew up in the
city of Detroit
on the East Side in a household,
and on the
outside looking in was the model
for middle-class
black America.
Unfortunately, what was
happening in my household,
which is all too often the case
for young
men and women who end up running
away, is
my mother was being abusive. And
I decided
to run away. And that's how I
got seduced
into the drug trade at the age
of 14.
JEFFREY BROWN: Drug trade, which
led you on
to streets, which led you to
guns.
SHAKA SENGHOR: When I first got
seduced into
that culture, I had no idea,
like, everything
that that entailed.
And it was a relatively short
time that I
experienced every imaginable
horror that comes
with drug culture, including a
childhood friend
being murdered, both my older
brothers being
shot, and eventually myself
being shot multiple
times at the age of 17.
And that's the world of street
culture. And
I wanted people to really
understand what's
happening in this space, why
it's happenings
and how we can stop it.
JEFFREY BROWN: And it led
eventually to you
shooting and killing someone.
SHAKA SENGHOR: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: When you say
people understanding,
did you understand at the time
right...
SHAKA SENGHOR: Not at all.
JEFFREY BROWN: No? Right and
wrong and...
SHAKA SENGHOR: I mean, it was an
understanding
of what was legal and what
wasn't legal.
You know, obviously, I grew up
with a moral
compass to differentiate between
right and
wrong. However, when you are
immersed in the
psychological trauma of high
levels of gun
violence, those decisions are
not always easy
to make.
JEFFREY BROWN: Not on your mind
at that...
SHAKA SENGHOR: Because it goes
from right
and wrong to what is survival.
And when you
are operating out of survival
mode, the rules
change.
JEFFREY BROWN: What did you
expect prison
would be like before you went?
SHAKA SENGHOR: I expected it to
be a horrible
experience of human misery.
And it proved to be true when I
went inside
prison at the age of 19. It was
really one
of the most volatile,
dehumanizing, degrading
environments in modern society
right now.
JEFFREY BROWN: You write about a
letter from
your then 10-year-old son,
right, that helped
transform you.
SHAKA SENGHOR: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Tell us about
that.
SHAKA SENGHOR: As a father, my
responsibility
is to provide and protect. And I
was failing
to do that by being incarcerated
for a very
serious crime, and one in which
my child was
growing up to look at me as a
monster.
So, I knew I had a
responsibility to turn
my life around in such a way
that he can understand
that, even though I made a poor
decision,
that doesn't totally define who
I am as a
human being.
JEFFREY BROWN: There are going
to be people
who watch this and say, you
killed somebody,
right?
SHAKA SENGHOR: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Prison is not
supposed to be
a good experience, right?
SHAKA SENGHOR: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: You're being
punished.
So, what's the response to that?
SHAKA SENGHOR: So, 90 percent of
who are incarcerated
will at some point get out.
And we have to decide what kind
of men and
women we want to return to
society. And the
idea that you can punish,
degrade and dehumanize
somebody and then expect
positive outcomes
is ridiculously absurd.
It just goes against logic,
because you get
out of people what you pour into
them. And
so my position is that, while I
had a horrible
experience, I am OK today,
because I was able
to do things to ensure that I
left with my
mental faculties intact and my
psychological
faculties intact. But that is
not the normal
case.
JEFFREY BROWN: Part of how part
of how you
did it was through reading and
then writing.
Right?
SHAKA SENGHOR: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Had you been a
reader, a writer
before all this?
SHAKA SENGHOR: So, those were
the classes
that I always excelled in.
They were things that I loved. I
learned how
to read when I was 4 years old.
I have always
had an appreciation for the
written word.
In terms of actually becoming a
writer, that
didn't come until later on, when
I just decided
to join into the world of
literature and just
started writing fiction and
things along those
lines.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, fiction was
the way in?
SHAKA SENGHOR: Yes, fiction was
the way in.
It allowed me to explore
different worlds.
It allowed me to examine
different aspects
of who I am as a person.
And I think sometimes you can
tell the deeper
truths through fiction, because
it is not
as antagonistic, it's not as
personal. Sometimes,
it gives you enough distance to
really kind
of think about things
differently.
And so literature played a
profound role in
turning my life around, but it
was also journaling
as well, like being able to
really write and
ask myself those tough
questions, like, how
did I go from wanting to be a
doctor to serving
my most promising years in
prison?
And the discoveries that I had
and epiphanies
I had along the way helped me
course-correct
and really rethink what I wanted
to do with
my life.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, now you're
out. You have
published this memoir, and you
were telling
me before we started about
getting involved
with literature, literacy
programs in Detroit.
SHAKA SENGHOR: Yes.
So, I grew up in Detroit. I do a
lot when
I'm home to work with young men
and women
who are growing up in a similar
circumstance
that I grew up in. And I found
that when you
can introduce them to literature
that connects
to their reality, that they are
a lot more
receptive.
Getting the book in the hands of
as many students,
high schoolers in Detroit to
read during the
summer would just be a
phenomenal way to have
a conversation about ending gun
violence and
disrupting the
playground-to-prison pipeline
that is so prevalent in inner
cities.
I think we're at a pivotal
moment when it
comes to criminal justice
reform. I think
we're at a pivotal moment when
it comes to
racial dynamics and inner-city
gun violence.
And people want change. And I
think the book
allows people to really examine
how we can
go about fixing things and
turning things
around.
JEFFREY BROWN: The book is
"Writing My Wrongs."
Shaka Senghor, thank you very
much.
SHAKA SENGHOR: Thank you so much
for having
me.
JOHN YANG: You can watch many
more of Jeff's
author interviews from BookExpo
America at
PBS.org/book-view-now.
And you can see all of our
recommendations
for summer reads on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Finally tonight, a "NewsHour"
essay from author
Sebastian Junger.
On this Independence Day, he
reflects on American
heroes.
SEBASTIAN JUNGER, Author:
Several years ago,
I spent much of a deployment
with a platoon
of combat infantry at a remote
outpost called
Restrepo.
It was named after the medic PFC
Juan Sebastian
Restrepo, who was born in
Colombia, emigrated
to America as a child, and died
fighting at
the bottom of a hill in
Afghanistan.
There was no running water at
Restrepo, no
cooked food, no communication
with the outside
world, and absolutely no
privacy. Mostly,
there was just a lot of combat.
The platoon
was in several hundred
firefights that year,
and everyone out there was
almost killed.
And yet over and over again, I
watched perfectly
ordinary people risk their lives
to keep others
safe. No one was more important
than anyone
else, and race, religion, and
politics had
absolutely no relevance at
Restrepo. It was
most profoundly egalitarian
place I have ever
been.
Every Fourth of July, I like to
think about
men like Private Restrepo and
what this country
must mean to them. Four percent
of our military
aren't even U.S. citizens. And
yet they emigrate
to our shores, put on a uniform
and fight
and die for us.
What is it they are fighting
for? What is
it they are risking death for?
For many, of
course, it is economic
opportunity. But that
very economic opportunity is
rooted in the
idea of a just society where
people are judged
on their own merits, rather than
for the sound
of their last name or the color
of their skin.
And that America may exist in
its purest form
on the front lines of our
nation's wars. How
sad. How ironic. Soldiers now
return to a
society that is tearing itself
apart along
every possible ethnic and
demographic boundary.
The gap between rich and poor
continues to
widen. Many people live in
racially segregated
communities, and rampage
shootings seem to
happen every week or two.
To make matters worse, powerful
people in
this country talk with
incredible contempt
about, depending on their views,
the president,
the government, the foreign-born
and entire
segments of the population.
I'm sorry to say that some of my
fellow Americans
would judge PFC Juan Restrepo
for his country
of origin before they got around
to honoring
him for his heroism.
I don't believe that this would
be happening
if people in power in this
country had even
a minimal understanding of true
public service.
I wonder if any of them thought
to give up
their salary for a year in
solidarity with
the millions of Americans who
lost their jobs
during a recession.
I wonder if any of them are
prepared to make
a real personal sacrifice for
the good of
this nation. And yet such acts
are found in
abundance among the citizens
they serve.
Last year, a lifelong New Yorker
named Marty
Bauman died at age 85. Mr.
Bauman contracted
polio while in the Army,
attended college
on the G.I. Bill, and went on to
start a successful
business in Manhattan. When his
company ran
into financial trouble in the
1990s, he secretly
gave up his salary, so that he
wouldn't have
to fire any of his staff. His
employees only
found out because the company
bookkeeper finally
told them.
People like Mr. Bauman are the
true heroes
of this country. This Fourth of
July, think
about the people, young and old,
rich and
poor, citizen and non-citizen,
who have made
sacrifices for us all.
Some are in uniform, but many
are not. They
all deserve our respect, but,
more than that,
they deserve a country that
respects itself.
I don't hear that sentiment in
the halls of
power. I only hear it at the
outposts of Afghanistan
and on the streets and in the
workplaces of
this great land.
Just a few days ago, I was
walking by a housing
project in New York City and saw
someone throw
a candy wrapper on the ground.
Another person
saw him as well.
"Hey, man," he said, "that's our
country."
That's right. That's our
country. If the powerful
do not learn this one lesson
from the rest
of us, they will not remain the
powerful for
long.
JOHN YANG: This week, President
Obama travels
to Poland for the NATO summit.
And, tomorrow, special
correspondent Nick
Schifrin begins our series The
New Cold War.
Tonight, we preview his
reporting with an
excerpt from the front lines in
Ukraine.
NICK SCHIFRIN: On this front
line, Annya (ph),
who also declined to give her
last name, leads
what she calls an infantry
brigade. The professional
Russian soldiers here whom U.S.
officials
say number in the thousands are
invisible.
So, as we walk down this road,
what is the
risk here?
WOMAN (through translator):
Total risk. We're
now walking in their snipers'
scopes. Here,
everything is within their
snipers' reach.
NICK SCHIFRIN: This is incoming.
We had been here just a few
minutes when we
heard the incoming bullets above
our head,
so we have taken cover. We're
staying low
right now, and we're beginning
to hear rebel
soldiers beginning to fire back.
JOHN YANG: Nick's reporting
takes him across
Ukraine and on to Estonia for a
large NATO
military exercise with one of
the former Russian
states.
See pictures from our series The
New Cold
on Instagram. You can find us
@NewsHour.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: the behind-the-scenes
push by some anti-Trump
Republicans to change
the rules of the Republican
National Convention.
Get an inside look at this rebel
movement
and how some RNC rule makers are
trying to
block them.
All that and more is on
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
John Yang.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening
for a Making the Grade report on
preschool
education.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thanks,
and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thanks,
and good night.